---
title: "Git stash"
layout: post
---

`git stash` is a quick and dirty tool for putting a set of changes to
one side, so that they can be later retrieved without having to make a
commit.

The simple usage is `git stash` to stash uncommitted/unstaged changes,
get on with whatever else you needed to do, then some time later `git
stash pop` to reapply those changes. This is handy but only gets you so
far.

What if you have multiple stashes? How do I see those changes and how
can I retrieve them?

## Looking inside a stash

To compare stashed changes with the current head:

    $ git stash show -p stash@{0}

`stash@{0}` is just a reference to the last stash that you saved.
`stash@{1}` is the previous one and so on.

If you just want to compare against the commit the stash was based on:

    $ git diff stash@{0}^!

## Listing stashes

You can see the list of stashes with:

    $ git stash list
    stash@{0}: WIP on feature-branch: 1a345b7 Commit message
    stash@{1}: WIP on master: 76b43a1 Commit message

Normally the stash doesn't have a message to tell what it contains so
git just outputs what it does know about the stash: the branch name and
commit SHA and message on which it was based.

## Give stashes a description

If you want to give a stash a meaningful label:

    $ git stash save 'some change I want to keep for later'

`git stash` is short for `git stash save`. These descriptions will show
up in the output from `git stash list`.

## Popping an older stash

So if you have stashed something useful a while back and want to quickly
reapply the change, first use `git stash list` to get the reference to
the stash you want and then (say its number 6):

    $ git stash pop stash@{6}

## Partial stashes

So you have made a bunch of changes and you want to split them up by
stashing some of them and leaving the remaining changes in place. You
can do this a couple of ways.

    $ git stash -p

`-p` is short for `--patch` and is a kind of interactive stash that will
prompt you to add hunks of changes one at a time.

You can also stage files with `git add ...` and then stash unstaged
changes with:

    $ git stash --keep-index

## Converting to a branch

It probably doesn't make a lot of sense to try to do any more with
stashes, you would probably be better off creating a proper branch:

    $ git stash branch new-branch-from-stash

