---
title: "ag tips"
layout: post
---

##Ag aka Silver Searcher

Ag is a file search tool and is a drop-in replacement for Ack.

It is fast and is designed for programmers who need a simple find in
files function. I mostly use it in Vim using the Ag.vim plugin but it's
a program that you can run from the command line. The examples below
just use `ag` from the command-line but if you have Ag.vim you can
substitute `ag` for `Ag` at the Vim command prompt to perform the same
search.

It works pretty well out of the box but there are a few configuration
options and command-line switches that make it even more useful so it's
worth getting to know a few tricks.

###Ignoring files and .agignore

To keep you searches fast and focused you'll probably want ag to ignore
certain files, file types and directories. By default the contents of
your `.gitignore` will be excluded from any searches but you might want
to customise this further. You can create a `.agignore` file in your
home directory and add file and directory patterns.

For example:

    log/*
    *.obj
    tmp/*
    tags

Excludes everything in the `log` and `tmp` directories as well as all
files with the `.obj` extension (in any directory) and your ctags file.
Certain patterns that work in `.gitignore` don't work in `.agignore`
however. For example, neither `**/*.log` and `log/*.log` match
`log/test.log`.

Its also worth bearing in mind that `ag` doesn't pick up `.gitignore` from
a parent directory so if you are doing a search from a sub-directory of
your project root you can't rely on `.gitignore` to exclude unwanted
search paths whereas `.agignore` is always picked up form your home
directory.

###Search for specific types of file

Sometimes you want to limit your search to a certain kind of file, maybe
you know what you are looking for is in a Ruby file.

Common file types are built into ag. You can check the file types that
ag knows about with the `--list-file-types` option:

    $ ag --list-file-types

      ...

      --ruby
          .rb  .rhtml  .rjs  .rxml  .erb  .rake  .spec
      ...

      --yaml
            .yaml  .yml

Ag just uses the file extension to work out what the type of each file
is. You can see that because Ruby is commonly embedded in `.erb` files
ag considers such files to be Ruby type files.

To search for `foobar` in Ruby files:

    $ ag --ruby foobar

or in JavaScript files:

    $ ag --js foobar

###Search expressions

Search expressions can be regular expressions as well as plain strings
but you might need to quote those:

    $ ag 'person|people'

There are several command-line options, a few that I find most useful
are:

- `-w` for whole word matching
- `-i` for case-insensitive matching
- `-s` for case-sensitive matching
- `-l` to just list files containing matches without content

###Searching in specific sub-directories

If you want to narrow your search to a specific directory and it's
sub-directories it's pretty straightforward to pass a path as a second
argument:

    $ ag foobar path/to/foo

or to search in all `.rb` and `.js` files under a certain path:

    $ ag foobar path/to/**/*.(rb|js)
