---
title: "Pry Notes"
layout: post
---

## Background

Pry is a great replacement for irb and is very useful if you ever need
to do any debugging. It does a lot. It's sometimes hard to remember all
the things it does especially when you don't create bugs that often.

## Basics

### Setting up Pry and using it as the Rails console

### Set a breakpoint

    require 'pry'; binding.pry;

Run the program and it will stop with a prompt when it hits the
breakpoint. From here you can do everything that `irb` does and more.

### Getting help

Pry has many commands that work like command line programs rather than
Ruby methods. To get started and list the commands that are available in
Pry and any installed plug-ins:

    pry> help

or use the `--help` option to get detailed help on any command:

    pry> ls --help

### Exiting Pry

If you want to just continue running your program from a breakpoint:

    pry> exit

This will only run until the next breakpoint so if you are stuck in a
loop and you really want to just stop the program you need:

    pry> exit-program

or

    pry> !!!

### Lost?
To get back to the code view

    pry> whereami

or

    pry> @

Sometimes you don't see enough code, you can specify the line count
either side of the breakpoint:

    pry> @ 10

### Call stack?
You need to include `pry-backtrace` in your Gemfile, then it's:

    pry> pry-backtrace

## Viewing and editing previous commands

### History
Pry stores every command you input and you can view these using the `hist`
command:

    [1] pry(main)> puts 'foo'
    foo
    => nil
    [2] pry(main)> hist
    1: puts 'foo'
    [3] pry(main)> puts 'foobar'
    foobar
    => nil
    [4] pry(main)> hist
    1: puts 'foo'
    2: hist
    3: puts 'foobar'
    [5] pry(main)>

### The `edit` command
Inputting short commands in Pry is pretty convenient but what if you
want to input a multi-line command such as defining a new method or you
want to edit a long command that mistyped?

Fortunately Pry integrates with your default editor via the `edit`
command. By default `edit` will open up the last command in your editor
and then re-run it when you exit the editor after whatever changes you
made. This works best if you use a terminal hosted editor like Vim.

If you need to edit a command earlier than the last then use the `hist`
command to find out which line number it's on and then use the `--in
<line-number>` option (line-number is either a single line or a range).
e.g. the following `edit` will open the `foo` method:

    [10] pry(main)> hist
     1: puts 'hello'
     ...
     5: def foo
     6:   puts 'foo'
     7: end
     ...
    10: puts 'world'
    [11] pry(main)> edit --in 5..7

## Pry and the clipboard

### Copying output to the clipboard

It is sometimes helpful to copy output from Pry to an external
program. You can do this reasonably easily if you have the `gist` gem
installed. This gem's primary use case is for creating Github gists from
Pry but it also has an option to output to the clipboard. You can access
this functionality using the `clipit` command which is available if you
have `gist` in your bundle.

The following copies the contents of the variable `foo` to the
clipboard:

    pry> foo = 'foo'
    => foo
    pry> foo;
    pry> clipit -o

You can also copy input lines using `clipit -i` in much the same way.

Alternatively MacOS users can make use of `pbcopy` and `pbpaste` via a
few tweaks to your `.pryrc`:

    # .pryrc
    def pbcopy(input)
      str = input.to_s
      IO.popen('pbcopy', 'w') { |f| f << str }
      str
    end

Then you can just do:

    pry> foo = 'foo'
    => foo
    pry> pbcopy(foo)

### Copying multiple lines into Pry

If you have a method or multi-line command in a source file you might
want to copy and paste this straight into Pry. This can be troublesome
because of the way Pry processes each line. Perhaps the easiest way
around it is to use the built-in `edit` command to open an editor and
paste the code in there before executing it.

Alternatively you can add a `paste` command in your `.pryrc`:

    # .pryrc
    def pbpaste
      `pbpaste`
    end

    Pry::Commands.block_command(
      'paste',
      'Pastes from the clipboard then evals it in the context of Pry'
    ) do
      _pry_.input = StringIO.new(pbpaste)
    end

## Shell commands

You can use the `.` operator to execute a shell command, e.g.

    pry> .ls

