---
title: "Hanami"
layout: post
---

Rails is such a dominant framework that it has almost become synonymous
for Ruby itself. It's rare to find a Rubyist who isn't also a Rails
developer.

Rails is great but can we all have too much of a good thing?

Is there space for something different, something new? If there is then
I think Hanami fits the space between Rails and Sinatra.

Note that Hanami was known as Lotus until a couple of weeks back.

##Why is Hanami important?

Rails has been a dominant framework in the Ruby community for 10+ years
now. There is a good reason for that, it's a great framework, it has
been a source of great ideas and is well executed. I expect to be using
Rails for some time to come in because it is such a great fit for a lot
of the sites and applications my employer builds.

Having said all that it's not healthy for all of us to use a single
framework and rely on the choices that the Rails team make for us. They
are good choices for most purposes but Rails does not have all the
ideas, it isn't perfect and a single framework can't accommodate all the
really great ideas that a community as big as Ruby generates.

If we just want to build something lightweight that doesn't bring in all
the dependencies that a fairly large framework like Rails does we have
Sinatra. But what if we want a more complete framework that gets us up
and running quickly but doesn't force us down the Rails way?
Hanami plugs that gap very nicely, it also happens to bring along some
fresh ideas and it seems to be very carefully thought out.

Ruby has a vibrant developer community that has drawn a lot of smart
(and good) people. But as Ruby continues to mature an increasing number
of alternative platforms emerge with the potential to attract the kinds
of people that make Ruby so strong. Competition, renewal, exchange of
ideas are all critical to maintaining a healthy modern developer
community.

##Why not just Rails?

I've seen quite a few Rails applications that have become pretty
complex. That's what happens when applications mature and we add more
features, you could argue that it's a consequence of success. So we need
to accept complexity and deal with it.

In doing so we need to strive to avoid some of these pitfalls:

* Code that is hard to understand and therefore hard to change.
* Slow and brittle test suites.
* Putting application logic where it doesn't belong.

###Monolithic applications
Rails encourages us to put build our applications as monoliths,
lots of controllers, lots of models, lots of views all bound together by
one application and one framework.

###Tight coupling
Rails makes it really easy to get started and add features using a set
of building block, models, controllers and views. Also helpers, now
channels, etc.

It's very easy to dump your business logic into these building blocks
and to couple them to the framework. For example, we dump business logic
into our models in callbacks and validations etc. and from that point on
it's tied to the persistence framework. We can't test those bits in
isolation and we can't easily move them to a different place.

##Why is Hanami different?

In three words - separation of concerns.

Hanami sets out to achieve long-term maintainability. It eschews magic
for more explicit code (though it uses conventions where they make
obvious sense).

Hanami sits between Rails and Sinatra in terms of features and rapid
development. It is a 'batteries-included' framework, in that it provides
all the core features that you need to get a Web application up and
running but it is significantly simpler than Rails, partly because it is
much younger and not yet feature complete. But there is a bigger
philosophical difference, it trades super rapid development for a
guiding hand that leads to cleaner code.

###Controllers and actions

Controllers are just Ruby modules that follow a naming convention (they
are nested in `AppName::Controllers`). Actions are separate classes
nested within their respective controller module.

Here is a simple example from the guides:

    module Web::Controllers::Dashboard
      class Index
        include Web::Action

        def call(params)
          self.body = 'OK'
        end
      end
    end

Note there is no base class for actions or controllers. The only
requirement is that an action class mixes in `Web::Action` and
implements a `call` method.

So is this better?

Separate action classes mean that the code in that class has a *single
responsibility*. It avoids the confusion that happens when our Rails
controllers start to get cluttered with filters and helper methods and
the confusion that leads to when we wonder which action uses which
filter/method. It's much easier to answer the question 'What am I going
to break if I change this?' when you have single action classes.

And it's still fine to factor out common functionality from multiple
actions. It maybe a little more effort but we just end up with something
where the intentions are a lot clearer.

###Views and templates

In Rails a view is a template. In Hanami they are separate things. A view
is just a Ruby class, another example from the guides:

    module Web::Views::Dashboard
      class Index
        include Web::View
      end
    end

Views only need follow the naming convention
`AppName::Views::ControllerName::ActionName` and mixin the `Web::View`
module.

Templates are separate files and should be pretty familiar to Rails
developers. The above example maps to a file with name
`dashboard/index.<format>.<view-engine>`, e.g.
`dashboard/index.html.erb`. (A single view can render to many formats,
e.g. JSON and HTML) and dozens of view engines are supported other than
ERB.

If you want to pass data from the controller to the View you need to
`expose` it. Hanami doesn't automatically make all your instance
variables available to the view so it's less tempting to start dumping
application logic into templates.

Templates have access to the methods of a view, you are encouraged to
put all view logic in the view class, where it can be easily unit-tested
without needing to render the view.

    module Web::Views::Dashboard
      class Index
        include Web::View

        def formatted_name
        end
      end
    end

Helpers are just Ruby modules that you can mix into a single view or all
views for an application. There is no automatic mixing in.

###Entities and repositories

In Rails the model logic is tied to the persistence layer, your model
objects can't be instantiated without a connection to the database
partly because of automatic data mapping but also because the same
objects contain domain logic and persistence details.

That's not good if you want to use your domain model classes without
worrying about persistence, e.g. in a controller test.

Hanami keeps a clean separation between the domain model (entities) and
the persistence layer (repositories). It also makes the mapping between
entities and the data store more explicit. There is a clear trade-off
here, we have to write a bit more code to make the mapping explicit to
get these benefits.

##Conclusions

Even it's authors would not have us drop Rails in favour of Hanami at
this point.

It is worthwhile taking a look at Hanami trying to build something
non-critical with it and seeing what you can learn. It's well documented
and it's under active development.

You are probably not going to get the opportunity to rewrite that
5 year old legacy application just because we all fancy trying something
new. But you can learn a lot by looking at some fresh ideas from a
different angle. To me that's what is great about having an active Ruby
community that questions and explores continually. If you can learn
something from Hanami and apply it to you next Rails project then maybe
your next 5 year old legacy application will be a bit more fun to work
on.
