---
title: "Lotus"
layout: post
---




##Why is Lotus important?

Rails has been a dominant framework in the Ruby community for 10+ years
now. There is a good reason for that, it's a great framework, it has
been a source of great ideas and is well executed. I expect to be using
Rails for some time to come in because it is such a great fit for a lot
of the sites and applications my employer builds.

Having said all that it's not healthy for all of us to use a single
framework and rely on the choices that the Rails team make for us.
For the most part they are good choices for most purposes but Rails does
not have all the ideas, it isn't perfect and a single framework can't
accommodate all the really great ideas that a community as big as Ruby
generates.

If we just want to build something lightweight that doesn't bring in all
the dependencies that a fairly large framework like Rails does we have
Sinatra. But what if we want a more complete framework that gets us up
and running fairly quickly but doesn't force us down the Rails way?
Lotus plugs that gap very nicely, it also happens to bring along some
fresh ideas and is very carefully thought out.

Ruby has a vibrant developer community that has drawn a lot of smart
(and nice) people. But as Ruby continues to mature an increasing number
of alternative platforms emerge with the potential to attract the kinds
of people that make Ruby so strong. Competition, renewal, exchange of
ideas are all critical to maintaining a healthy modern developer
community.





##Why is Lotus different?

https://blog.8thlight.com/uncle-bob/2012/08/13/the-clean-architecture.html
