---
title: "Why I use Vim"
layout: post
---

## Background

Editors come and go and some very nice ones have come out recently. I've
been trying to work out why I stick with Vim. Am I too lazy to learn a
new editor? Why don't I give Atom, Sublime or VS Code a more serious
try?

## History

I used to be a full-time IDE user, Visual Studio mostly and I dabbled
with Eclipse too. I've also tried a few graphical editors too, remember
TextMate?

But for the past 6 years I've stuck with Vim. More specifically I've
used Vim in a command-line terminal for 6 years.

## Why?

There are lots of reasons why I like Vim. I do like the modal editing
experience and I feel good about the editing superpowers it gives me
(though if I'm honest I *still* feel like a novice user and expect to be
still learning to use it *properly* for years to come). But the main
reason I like it is simply that it's a command-line editor.

All the 'modern' editors are GUI applications. For me that means that
they live in their own world, cut off (to some degree) from the other
programs I use to get my job done. There are some amazing plug-ins in
modern editors to integrate most, perhaps all, of the other programs I
need. However this doesn't quite work for me.

I like to work in a command line terminal, it just feels right to me. I
know a lot of developers, I respect, who use GUI applications for most
of their dev tools and are very productive doing so. Do whatever works
for you.

I don't like IDEs much. I know it's a trade-off but I prefer to have
tools that do one job well. Having source control integrated into the
program I use to edit text files is just mixing things up too much for
me. This is important to me because I like the feel of lightweight
tools, I can open any file (or directory) pretty much instantly in my
editor, with an IDE I have to wait a few seconds and I have a very short
attention span.

I think IDE bloat and the *I'm not using it if it doesn't integrate with
my IDE* mentality was what finally turned me away from .NET development
as much as a desire to work with a new programming language. It led to
an over-dependence on tool vendor to give you access to the right tools.
Modern code editors are not so bad as Visual Studio in this respect but
there are too many reminders for me!

Anyway this is all a bit woolly and subjective, here are some more
concrete examples of why a command-line editor works for me:

### How to write a Git commit message

I was never interested in GUI git tools, Git is primarily a set
of command line tools, you need to learn those so adding a pretty
front-end only served to confuse me. When I first started using Git I
used `git commit -m` to enter a commit message. This has it's
limitations and doesn't really permit you to write good (multi-line)
descriptions.

So I need some basic texting editor facility to write my commit
messages. GUI front-ends to Git might give you a dialog box with a text
area to enter the message. This seemed a bit clumsy to me, then I
discovered that if you just do `git commit` without `-m` then Git will
open your default text editor to let you enter you message.

So all I do now is `git commit -v`, this opens Vim prompting me to enter
my message as well as including a diff of the changes. I get
autocomplete on all the class, method and variable names I've added
(because of the diff) as well as highlights to guide me when I exceed
the recommended line length for example. I know how to write a commit
message because I know how to user Vim.

### How to write SQL queries

Graphical database front-ends are very popular among developers trying
to take a look closer look at their development, test or production data.

I use `psql`, the command-line database client for Postgresql on a daily
basis. It may appear rather basic but it turns out to be very powerful.
I have a history of commands I've executed that I can search through
with the same `Ctrl-R` shortcut that I use to search `zsh` commands so I
don't need to remember a new application specific shortcut. There are
many nice consistencies like this.

If I write a long query and mistype a column name somewhere deep inside
I can up arrow and then edit the query inline. This can get clumsy, so
instead I can type `\e` to invoke my default editor to edit the last
query. Any syntax highlighting, autocomplete and other plugins I use for
editing SQL in my day-to-day editor are then automatically available to
me when I edit a query in `psql` because I'm using the same editor. This
all happens with leaving the terminal.

### How to get rapid feedback when practising TDD


